# Modeling data with probability distributions

Materials I developed for an intro to statistical modeling/simulations workshop

Was designed to be paired with reading of chapters 2 and 4 of "Probability for Enthusiastic beginners", which are freely available as [samples online](https://scholar.harvard.edu/david-morin/probability).

## Details

Practically all of statistics relies on modeling data using probability distributions. Thus, the key to understanding concepts such as hypothesis testing, linear modeling, and so much more is developing a deep appreciation for various probability distributions and the types of processes they can describe. The Word document walks through a number of the most widely used distributions and examples of data generating processes they can aptly model. The PowerPoint presentation is a workshop using random number generation in the programming langauge R to further one's familiarity with a number of important probability distributions and their properties. **All of the examples in the PowerPoint and Word document are geared specifically towards working with RNA-seq data, and with an extension of RNA-seq that the [Simon lab](https://simonlab.yale.edu/) at Yale developed called [TimeLapse-seq](https://www.nature.com/articles/nmeth.4582).** That being said, I think much of the information is of general use.

One incredibly useful skill that a familarity with modeling data using probability distributions affords is the ability to simulate data. Simulating data using random number generators can be a powerful way to arrive at a deeper appreciation for various types of data. I have also used simulations extensively during my PhD as an indispensable tool to test novel strategies designed to analyze a particular type of data (i.e., simulated data is a known ground truth that you can compare to estimates of the truth provided by the analysis), as well as to help guide experimental design (e.g., simulating data to see if a particular experiment is likely able to help you distinguish between two competing hypotheses). Throughout both the PowerPoint and Word document, I try and provide examples for how a knowledge of distributions and their properties can help you design interesting and useful simulations.
